# Synthetic-Over-sampling-with-the-Minority-and-Majority-classes-for-imbalance-problems

Class imbalance is a substantial challenge in classifying many real-world cases. Synthetic over-sampling methods have been effective to improve the performance of classifiers for imbalance problems. However, most synthetic over-sampling methods generate non-diverse synthetic instances within the convex hull formed by the existing minority instances as they only concentrate on the minority class and ignore the vast information provided by the majority class. They also often do not perform well for extremely imbalanced data as the fewer the minority instances, the less information to generate synthetic instances. Moreover, existing methods that generate synthetic instances using distributional information of the majority class cannot perform effectively when the majority class has a multi-modal distribution. We propose a new method to generate diverse and adaptable synthetic instances using Synthetic Over-sampling with the Minority and Majority classes (SOMM). SOMM generates synthetic instances diversely within the minority data space. It updates the generated instances adaptively to the neighbourhood including both classes. Thus, SOMM performs well for both binary and multiclass imbalance problems. We examine the performance of SOMM for binary and multiclass problems using benchmark data sets for different imbalance levels. The empirical results show the superiority of SOMM compared to other existing methods.
